1. Training is available at these sites: [biostar Handbook and Penn State](https://www.biostarhandbook.com/); 
[UC Davis](http://bioinformatics.ucdavis.edu/training/). I am enrolled in the Penn State course. See the folder entitled [biostar handbook](https://github.com/shankar4/Functional-Genomics/tree/master/bioistar%20handbook) for my progress (and R code).  

2. Genomics Forum is [here](https://www.biostars.org/)

3. Databases: [Genbank at NCBI](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/). **For more info, please see the folder entitled [Functl Gen Pevsnar](https://github.com/shankar4/Functional-Genomics/tree/master/FunctlGen%20Pevsner)**; 

4. Glossary (consolidated): A 1996 version of the Human Genome map is found [here](http://geneticssuite.net/node/33). Their definition of 'extragenic' not seen in literature. They do not use 'intergenic' either; but still a good map. **Note**: Some of these are reproduced verbatim from other public sites; no authorship is claimed. They are summarized and thus may not contain nuances. Some book references are also given at the end of this section. 
   * [Aldehyde](https://www.britannica.com/science/aldehyde) - An organic compound with a C atom double bonded to an O atom ('carbonyl group') and single bonded to an H atom and separately, to another atom or a group of atoms (the generic 'R'). Many aldehydes have a pleasant odor, derived from alcohols. They polymerize with other molecules (eg. commercial - plastics such as Bakelite and Formica, and solvents). Physiological - retinal - vitamin A aldehyde, pyridoxal phosphate, a form of Vitamin B<sub>6</sub>. *Glucose* and other reducing sugars are aldehydes, as are many natural and synthetic hormones. 
    * Alu - They are SINES (short interspersed elements) present in multiple copies in human and other primate genomes; about 300 bp in length, found in introns, 3' UTR, and intergenic genomic regions; mobile elements and has most abundant copy number (0.5 M). It is used as a universal PCR primer as it binds in both directions.
   * Amino Acid - A simple organic compound; has a carboxyl (—COOH), an amino (—NH2) group, and a distinctive side chain ('R Group'). Exception: Proline has no carboxyl group.  More than 100 AAs are described in nature; only 20 are commonly found in mammalian proteins. Only R chains are available for chemical reaction and decide the role an AA plays in a protein (proteins are linear polymers of AAs). AAs are classified according to the polarity of their side chains (nonpolar, uncharged polar, acidic, or basic). In proteins, AAs are joined covalently by peptide bonds between carboxyl group of one AA and amino group of the neighboring AA.   
    * bacteriophase or phage - any virus that infects bacteria
    * BMI and classes - Normal 18.5 to 25-, overweight  25 -30-, obese 30+, obese class I  30 to 35-, class II 35 to 40-, class III 40+
    * domain - a discrete portion of a protein assumed to fold independently and has its own function
    * Carbohydrates - Most abundant organic molecule in nature. Provide a large fraction of the energy in the diet; mediate intercellular communication; and serve as a structural component in many organisms (as cell walls in bacteria, exoskeleton of insects; and cellulose of plants). Generic formula: (CH<sub>2</sub>O)<sub>n</sub> - hence the name "hydrate of carbon." 3 carbons - triose, 6 carbons - hexose, etc. Carbs with an aldelyde are aldoses; a keto are ketoses - these functional groups are their most oxidized. Monosaccharides are linked by glycoside bonds to create larger structures. Disacch..has two monosacch..; Oligosacch -- 3 to 12; Polysacch...12 to 100s of sugar units. Complex Carbs - Carbs attached by glycosidic bonds to noncarb structures ('aglycones'). Typical aglycones: purines and pyrimidines; aromatic rings (steroids and bilirubin); proteins (glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans), and lipids (glycolipids). 
    * collagen - most abundant family of proteins in the human body. Rigid insoluble protein found in all multicellular organisms. Type and organization in different tissues is dictated by the structural role played there (in extracellular matrix (ECM) and the vitreous humor - as a gel to stiffen the structure; in tendons - bundled as tight parallel fibers; in cornea -tightly stacked to transmit light with no scattering; in bones - fibers arranged at angles to resist mechanical shear in all directions). Pre-collagen are formed in fibroblasts and are secreted into the ECM. After enzymatic modifications, the collagen monomers aggregate and cross-link to form fibrils. Primary structure is unusual - glycine, the smallest AA, is found in every third position (Gly-X-Y-<repeat>). X is frequently proline; Y is mostly hydroxyproline or hydroxylysine. These are not found in most other proteins; hyrdoxylation (i.e., introduction of a hydroxyl group) of proline and lysine is a post-translational modification. Hydroxyproline is important in stabilizing the triple helical structure. Glycine fits into the narrow space where three helix chains and holds together through its hydrogen bonds between nitrogen and carbonyl oxygen residues. The hydroxyl group of the hydroxylysine may be glycosylated (a disaccharide of glucose and galactose). 
    * enhancer - enhance the rate of transcription; typically they are far away (1000s of bp away) from the sequence.
    * Enzymes Vs Proteins - Enzymes (proteases) break the peptide bonds between the amino acids that make up a protein. eg trypsin and chymotrypsin in the stomach break large proteins into smaller peptides. Carboxypeptidase break peptides into amino acids. Enzymes can speed up the reaction thousand to million fold. 
    * GeneID - unique ID in Entrez Gene; an integer which is species specific. Reported in RefSeq as a 'db_xref'.
    * Glycoproteins - most secreted and membrane proteins. has 1 to 80 sugars in oligosaccharide chain    
    * GAG - Glycosaminoglycans, chains of repeating dissacharides; comprises of an amino sugar (eg GalNac or GlcNac) and a sugar acid (eg glucouronic acid). 10 to 1000 dissacharide units in a chain. OH and amino groups of sugars are frequently sulfated. eg. HA (Hyaluronan). 
    * Glucose and Glycogen - A constant source of glucose (C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O<sub>6</sub>) is an absolute requirement foor human life. Glucose is the preferred energy source of the brain and is the required energy source for cells with few or no mitochondria (e.g., mature RBC - red blood cell) Glucose is essential for exercising muscles - serves as the substrate for the pathway of anaerobic glycolysis. Glucose can be supplied  to the body from different dietary sources: starch and the disacchs (lactos, maltose, and sucrose); carbon skeletons of other monosacchs (fructose, galactose); AA carbon skeletons(glucogenic); and small carbs (glycerol). All are converted to glucose via gluconeogenesis. Dietary intake of glucose is sporadic; the body needs a reliable source of blood glucose. Glucose is stored as glycogen; when glucogen stores are depleted, the body uses AAs from the body's proteins for gluconeogenesis. Glycogen is stored in skeletal muscle and liver. Muscle glycogen is the fuel reserve for ATP synthesis during muscle contraction. Liver glycogen maintains blood glucose concentration. Glycogen is a branched chain made from α-D-glucose).
    * Gluconeogenesis - pathway that results in the generation of glucose from some non-carb carbon substrates (glucogenic AAs from proteins; glycerl fro triglycerides (lipids), and from other steps in metabolism (including pyruvate and lactate). 
    * Glycolysis - pathway is used by all tissues for glucose breakdown, to provide energy and building blocks for synthesis. Three of the reactions are irreversible. If mitochondria and oxygen are present, *aerobic glycolysis* of glucose leads to two pyruvate molecules. It is converted to acetyl CoA, main input to Krebs cycle (also called citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle). Theoretical maximum yield of ATP through oxidation of one molecule of glucose in glycolysis, Krebs cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation is 38 (actual yield: 30 typical). *Anaerobic glycolysis* occurs if no mitochondria or low oxygen, leading to production of lactate and energy (the Cori cycle). The glycolysis part produces 2 ATP molecules, at a cost of 6 ATP molecules consumed in the gluconeogenesis part. The cycle cannot be sustained indefinitely, because of this net consumption of 4 ATPs The Cori cycle shifts the metabolic burden fromthe muscles to the liver.  
    * HapMap and Haploview -  A **haplotype** is a set of DNA polymorphisms that are likely to be inherited together (on the same chromosome - **alleles** (alternate forms of a gene) or a set of SNPs). Haplotype map (HapMap) identifies genetic variants affecting health, disease, drug sensitivity, and environmental impact. Two unrelated people share 99.5% of their DNA sequence. HapMap focuses on common SNPs where each allele occurs in >1% of the population (rare **Mendeilian** diseases: <0.1 % ( in in a thousand) to a few in a million). 
    * Hazard Ratio and Odds Ratio [Ref](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/91107/is-there-any-functional-difference-between-an-odds-ratio-and-hazard-ratio) - **Odds ratio** of 2 in logistic regression means that the event is 2 times more probable given a unit increase in the predictor. In Cox regression, a **hazard ratio** of 2 means that the event will occur twice as often at each time point given a one-unit increase in the predictor. The former is a static model, while the latter considers the time element. Probability (from odds ratio) is fixed, while hazard (from hazards ratio) can increase with time (here: doubles every unit of time).  
    * Hemeprotein - In hemoglobin and myoglobin, the two most abundant hemeproteins, the tightly bound prosthetic heme group serves to reversibly bind oxygen. Iron is held in the center of the heme molecule. Myoglobin is located primarily in heart and skeletal muscle. Hemoglobin is found exclusively in red blood cells (RBC). Myoglobin has higher affinity to oxygen. The oxygen dissociation curve is hyperbolic vs sigmoidal for hemoglobin; in the latter, this (due to cooperative binding) helps with more oxygen delivery to tissues in response to minor changes in partial pressure of oxygen there. Sickle cell anemia (found in 1 in 500 newborn infants) is a genetic disorder that leads to two mutant β chains. Sickle cells may block capillaries, leading to local lack of oxygen and tissue death. More common among African Americans. In Africa, **selective advantage**: heterozygotes are less susceptible to some forms of malaria. 
    * homologous - similarity attributable to descent from a common ancestor
    * Hyaluronan - HA. a lubrican found in soft tissues (skin, cartilage) and synovial fluid (of joints). Highly viscous (1000 fold vs water). Good biological shock absorber. 
    * Intron vs intergenic - introns are short non-goding regions found within genes (in eukaryotics). Intergenic is a stretch of DNA between genes, potentially noncoding. ENCODE - as new genes and their isoforrms are discovered, the # of intergenic regions has increased, while their lengths have decreased. They contain promoters and enhancers. They  also contain **noncoding RNAs** - not translated into a protien, but include functionally important transfer RNAs (tRNAs), ribosomal RNAs(rRNA), and others (microRNA, siRNA, long ncRNA, etc). Affect diseases such as cancer, autism, and Alzheimer's. 
    * Ketones - See Aldehyde above; these are two of the most important organic molecules. Both have a carbonyl group. In a ketone, both atoms bonded to the carbony group are other carbon atoms (in an aldehyde, at least one atom on the carbony carbon is a hydrogen). 
    * Linkage Disequilibrium - is the non-random association of alleles at different loci in a given population. Say allele A occurs with frequency P(A); similarly B with P(B). There is LD if P(AB) differs from P(A)P(B)
    * Map Viewer - available in Entrez Genomes. Can view the complete genome, display chromosome maps,and zoom in.
    * microsatellite - repititive stretches of short DNA sequences used as genetic markers to track inheritance in families. Also known as STRs (short tandem repets).
    * Monogenic and Polygenic -  there are over 4000 human diseases caused by single-gene defects. **Autosomal dominant** - only one mutated copy of the gene to be affected by the disorder (eg. Huntigton's disease, Marfan syndrome); Autosomal recessive -- two mutated copies of the gene must exist for this disorder to mainifest (eg. sickle-cell disease, CF). Polygenic disorders - complex, multifactorial (genetic/life style/ environmental), and run in families. Inheritance does not fit simple patterns as with **Mendelian diseases**, but can still be located and studied. eg., asthma, cancers, diabetes, heart disease, mood disorder. 
    * Odds Ratio: From [ref](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2938757/): The OR represents the odds that an outcome will occur given a particular exposure, compared to the odds of the outcome occurring in the absence of that exposure. Used in case-control, cross-sectional, and cohort studies. Example from the ref: Exposure (+/- or case/control) vs Outcome Status (+/-, have/dont have). Then OR = [case(n)/control(n)]/ [Have(n)/Donothave(n)], or in their table {a/c]/[b/d].  In their example, total = 263 had suicidal behavior at study start. 86 had depression. At 6 month follow-up, 77 still had suicidal behavior, of which 45 had depression at baseline. This gives a (++)= 45; b(+-)= 86, c(-+) = 32 (from 77-45), d(--)= 100 (from 186-86). So, OR = [a/c]/[b/d]= 45 x 100/32 x 86 = 1.63. "The odds of persistent suicidal behavior is 1.63 higher given baseline depression diagnosis vs no baseline depression." From this CI (confidence interval) is calculated. 95% CI is 0.96 to 2.86. This includes 1.0; so not significant. The ref article indicates this with P of 0.07. 
    * Oligosaccharide - sugars with small number of monosaccharides
    * orthology - describes different species that derive from a common ancestor
    * paralog - a set of homologous genes that have diverged.
    * PDB - Protein Data Bank
    * Plasmid - circular molecule of double helical DNA; replicates independently of the bacterial cell's chromosome.
    * promoter - A transcription factor attaches to this sequence to initiate transcription. Consists of 3 regions: Initiator box where transcription starts; TATA box 25 bases upstream from there; and 10 bp long upstream element - specific to a protein.
    * Protein - proteins are linear polymers of AAs. However, they do not form long spaghetti like molecules. They form instead regularly repeating *secondary structures* - typically α-helix and β-pleated sheet. Collagen has a unique triple helix secondary structure. The overall shape of the protein molecule, the *tertiary structure*, is mostly globular (exception: collagen which is a fibrous protein). The 3-D structure is uniquely decided by the AA sequence. Four types of interactions cooperate in stabilizing the 3-D shape: hyrdophobic interactions (AAs with nonpolar side chains fold into the interior, snugly with other such AAs); hyrdrogen bonds (weak. Between loose hydrogens in alcohol groups with electron-rich nitrogen or oxygen in carboxyl or amide group, etc); ionic bonds (between -vely charged carboxyl and positively charged amino groups); and covalent bonds (a disulfide bond between the thiol group of two cysteine AAs - may be far from each other - helps with 3-D stability). Two proteins (Hemeprotein and Collagen) are described elsewhere to elucidate the relationof structure to function. 
    * Proteoglycan - GAG + core protein (attached at OH of specific serine residues). 100 or more chains attached to a single core protein; bottlebrush architecture. eg. cartilage - collagen fibers combined with large proteoglycans. 
    * Pseudogene - defective duplicate copy of a genuine gene; cannot be expressed. 
    * Putative vs annotated (functional) - Putative == generally considered to be; Putative proteins are similar to annotated proteins in their sequences, esp in the conserved amino acid portions. Thus the putative is a predicted sequence similar to an annotated protein,  not yet verified functionally. 
    * **Repeats** - 3 major categories - terminal, tandem and interspersed repeats. LTR - Long terminal repeats - identical DNA sequences repeated 100 to 1000 times, found at the ends of retrotranspososns. Used by viruses to insert their genetic material into host genomes; tandem - adjacent copies (direct or inverted) - satellite (cound in centromeres), minisatellite (10 to 60 bp repeats), and microsatellites (<10 bp repeats, as at telomeres); interspersed - transposable (DNA and retrotransposons) - within retrotransposons - **SINEs, LINEs, and SVAs**. Majority of LINEs are LINE-1 and majority of SINEs are **Alus**. In prokaryotes, **CRISPR** are arrays of alternating repeats and spacers. 
    * RNA Polymerase - binds to DNA during transcription and separates or unwinds the DNA strands. Three types and genes that they transcribe: I - genes for large ribosomal RNAs, II - genes that code for proteins, and III - genes for tRNA and other tiny RNAs.
    * QTL - Quantitative Trait Locus - a hypothesis that a certain small chromosomal region contributes significantly to a complex trait expression (based on density of linkage map)
    * recombination - merging of genes from two separate molecules of DNA
    * RefSeq - non-redundant reference sequences.
    * RepeatMaker - program that screens DNA sequence for interspersed repeats and low-complexity DNA sequences.
    * restriction - destruction of incoming foreign DNA by a bacterial cell
    * restriction enzyme - acts as molecular scissors to cut DNA into smaller manageable pieces.
    * splicing - cutting out the intronic regions. Telomere cap and poly-A tail are added prior to this.
    * Tertile - three parts
    * transcription factors - Proteins that regulate RNA Polymerase II, by binding to certain specific DNA sequences,viz., promoter and enhancer
    * transduction - transport of genes from one cell to another with a virus particle as the transporter
    * Transformation - changing the properties of a bacterial cell as a result of uptake of pure DNA
    * UniGene cluster - sequences for known or putative genes. Complete dataset is here
    * WGS sequence - Whole Genome Shotgun sequence - uses large arrays of sequences to sequence rapidly the sequence.
    
    

*Book references used*:
* Biochemistry, Lippincott's Illustrated Reviews, by P.C. Champe and R.A. Harvey, 1987
* Biology: Concepts and Connections, by N.A. Campbell et al., Fifth edition, 2006
    
   
    
   
    

