This is a continuation of readme.md. Mostly notes from "Molecular Biology" 4th ed., by Clark and Russell.
1. Chapter 8 on Gene Transfer in Bacteria - Bacteria divide by binary fission (asexual or vegetative). However, uptake of pure DNA
is possible ('transformation') that can change the properties of the bacterial cell. Transformation is used in genetic engineering.
Most often electroshock treatment is used to push DNA, a huge molecule through the cell walls. DNA uptake may fail (restriction) or 
succeed (recombination). Restriction enzymes chop up the incoming DNA in 'restriction.' The bacteria is permanently changed after 
recombination. If the incoming is part of a plasmid, which replicates on its own, recombination into the chromosome is not needed; 
use of plasmid is preferred. Transduction - Bacterial geneticists routinely carry out gene transfer by using bacterial viruses, known as bacteriophage (or phage). Example: For *E. Coli*, phages are named PI and Lambda. **Plasmids** were discovered in Japanese bacterial soon after WWII ('transmissible antibiotic resistance'). Dysentry, due to bacteria, was being treated with sulfonamides, the earliest type of antibiotic. Bacterial resistant to this antibiotic soon started to appear. Also, the resistance was transferred to other strains of bacteria. Genes for antibiotic resistance were found to be carried on plasmids. Today, this is a major problem. Patients with infections after surgery or with severe burns and infection are most at risk. General properties: They are circular DNA molecules that can replicate independently of the bacterial chromosome. They carry genes for managing their own life cycles and genes that affect the host cell (such as resistance to antibiotics). Also used extensively by molecular biologists in genetic engineering. Plasmids replicate in step with cell division. The copy number (number of plasmids per cell) may range from 1 to 50. F-plasmid in *E.Coli* is 1% of the size of the chromosome. Other plasmids can be 0.1% to 10% of chromosome size. 
2. Chapter 9 on Genetic Engineering (brief for now). Phenol is used DNA purification. Also known as carbolic acid, it is very corrosive and dangerous (it can dissolve and denature/remove proteins - which is about 70% of all living matter). DNA and RNA will be left at top of water and phenol mixture. Ribonuclease is an enzyme that degrades RNA (leaves DNA unchanged). Adding alcohol will push the larger and less soluble (vs water) DNA into a tiny pallet at the bottom of a test tube. DNA is then redissolved. **Restriction enzyme** acts as molecular scissors to cut the DNA into smaller manageable pieces. They bind to DNA at a specific sequence of bases, the recognition site. Sequence is 4, 6, or 8 bases long, and form an inverted repeat. There are many random sequences that will match these restriction enzymes and cut up the DNA. ** Type 1** - cut the DNA a thousand or more bp away from the recognition site; **Type 2** - cut the DNA in the middle of the recognition site. **DNA ligase** is used to join DNA fragments permanently. Choosing a vector for lab/clinical needs: any DNA molecule can be used as a vector. But easier with these considerations: vector should be small, easy to move from cell to cell, and growing and purifying DNA should be easy. **Bacterial plasmids** come closes to these requirements. **Most widely used as vectors**. Modern additional requirements: detect the presence of the vector; select for cells that contain the vector; insert genes into the vector; and detect the presence of the inserted gene on the vector. Typically, one starts with ColEI plasmid of *E. Coli* . It is small (and circular), and has 40 copies per cell. First get rid of genes for Colicin E1, a toxic protein for killing bacteria. Next add gene for resistance to antibiotic ampicilin. Use restriction enzyme to cut out the vector and add the gene to be cloned. Use DNA ligase to ligate the gene and vector together. **Yeast Artificial Chromosomes**: Genes for higher organisms may be huge (1000 bp for bacterial genes Vs 1 million bp for genes for muscular dystrophy or hemophilia). Largest bacterial plasmids are 50kbp. So, for carrying huge pieces of DNA - use YAC. We use a linear DNA molecule and add the correct telomere sequence required for eukaryotic chromosomes. An yeast cell will treat this as a chromosome. 
3. Chapter 10: Biotechnology. Add more later. Earliest form - alcohol made by fermenting grains, using yeast. Humans were not the first ones. Elephants, monkeys, etc., intentionally consume fruit that has rotted and fermented naturally to yield alcohol. Alcohol is made from sugar. Sugars are  derived from carbohydrates, bulk of plant matter. Zymomonas (a bacterium) is used in Mexico to make Tequila; grows faster than yeast and makes alcohol faster. Both Y and Z live entirely on glucose. Genetic engineering is being used to improve Y and Z strains so they can breakdown starch and cellulose. Paper is entirely cellulose, a linear polymer of sugar glucose. Cellulose breakdown occurs in 4 steps, with different enzymes. **Alcohol breakdown in the body**: In liver, with two enzymes: alcohol dehydrogenase and acetaldehyde dehydrogenase. Women have less of the first enzyme in the stomach lining. So, a greater percentage of alcohol enters women's bloodstream. Isoenzyme - structural variants and their alleles on Chr 4 and elsewhere, which are preferentially expressed in different body tissues. Gives rise to genetic and racial differences in the ability to metabolize alcohol. Alcoholism gene is yet to be found. Alcoholics have 2,3-butanediol in their blood. **Plastics**: are polymers built from chains of monomers, similar to proteins and DNA; however, it is the same monomore repeated. Some bacteria store PHAs (polyhyrdoxy-alkanoates), plastics. They use them as sources of energy when appropriate. Mixing different subunits can yield better physical properties. **Antibiotics**: difficult to make. Reason: they are made by microorganisms in 20 or more steps, with different enzymes. Cloning and expressing all the genes for a single antibiotic is not easy. Fleming discovered Pencilin; also Lysozyme, which breaks down bacterial cell wall (and is found in blood, sweat, and tears, and egg whites). **Hormones**: regulatory molecules that travel around the bodies; coordinate operations inside the body. Made in glands and secreted into body fluids. Could be proteins or simpler molecules (e.g., steroids). Proteins are easier to make with genetic engineering. Insulin: first genetically engineered human hormone. Today, recombinant bacterial used for this. Two polypeptide (short AA string) chains held together by sulfide bonds. Encoded by a single gene. Makes proinsulin which has both these chains + a connecting peptide. Today's solution: make two artificial mini-genes, insert into plasmids, and into two separate bacteria. The products are mixed and chemically treated to get disulphide bonds. Tendency to clump in a syrnige and takes a few hours to declump and lower glucose. This is also addressed today. **Human proteins made by bacteria**: erythropoietin - for RBC and anemia; Factor VIII - form blood clots, for hemophiliacs; Insuline - for diabetes; Interferon (alpha) - for Hep b & C; Interferon (beta) - for MS; Interlukin-2- for killing tumor cells; tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA): dissolves blood clots - in strokes and heart attacks. 
4. Chapter 11: Eukaryote (EK) organization: In EK, nucleus is a separate cell compartment, surrounded by a double-layer membrane. Keeps Chrs within the nucelus. ProK - 1000s of genes; humans ~20K genes. Ek cells are much bigger. Many compartments (called organelles, since they are similar to body organs, but mini size) inside a cell, surrounded by membranes. Mitochondria are the most common. Mito generate energy by the oxidation of food molecules ('**respiration**'). Chrs have linear. The middle, more often in the center, is 'centromere.' The two subdivisions are called P and Q, with Q the longer one. Plays a role in division. Telomere: consists of 6 bp repeated 2000 times. During each replication, the Chr is shortened by the length of the RNA primer; but telomerase (an enzyme) cancels this loss out by adding a few 6 bp chunks each time around. Telomerase carries the complement of the Tel 6bp, so it can recognize the Ts. DNA packing: 95+% of the DNA sequence is non-coding. EK Chrs may be a cm long and is folded up to fit inside the nucleus which is 5 micron across, or 2000-fold shortening. DNA coils around **histones** (positively charged; neutralizes DNA's negative charge) -- combination is called 'chromatin'. 200 bp of DNA is wrapped around 9 histones --> called a **nucleosome**. The 9th histone connects one particle to next. OVerall, a Chr with its DNA twised into a series of nucleosomes resemble a string of beads, except the folding process continues. 6 nucleosomes make up one turn of a 'solenoid'. There are 50 solenoid turns per loop, with the ends attached to a protein scaffold. 18 of these loops are would radially around the Chr axis to give a miniband. Million such minibands make up the full Chr. Chrs are visible only when dividing. Otherwise, spread out, performaing cellular functions. **Repeated Sequences**: 


12.  Glossary (continued): 
* bacteriophase or phage - any virus that infects bacteria
* Plasmid - circular molecule of double helical DNA; replicates independently of the bacterial cell's chromosome. 
* recombination - merging of genes from two separate molecules of DNA
* restriction - destruction of incoming foreign DNA by a bacterial cell
* restriction enzyme - acts as molecular scissors to cut DNA into smaller manageable pieces. 
* transduction - transport of genes from one cell to another with a virus particle as the transporter
* Transformation - changing the properties of a bacterial cell as a result of uptake of pure DNA
