readme2.md is continued here. This is essentially summary of certain chapters of Molecular Biology, 4th edition (2010), by Clark and Russelll
1. Genomics and DNA Sequencing, Chapter 23: DNA sequencing involves generating sub-fragments of all possible lengths from the DNA to be sequenced. DNA is colorless, odorless, and tasteless. Radioactively labeling (**Autoradiography**) is used with gel electrophoresis to separate these segments. They are grouped according to which base they end in (4 groups) and run in four parallel lanes. The largest and slowest will be near the initial loading end, while the smallest and fastest will be at the other end. Prior to this, the Chain Termination Method is used in thesegmentation (early termination) process (not detailed here). The Oligonucleotide (i.e., short DNA fragment) Array Detector, or the GeneChp, is useful both for diagnostic purposes and for large scale DNA sequencing. It uses DNA-DNA hybridization. Synthetic single strand DNA fragments on the chip are exposed to denatured (to get single strand) DNA fragment under test. Complementary strands hybridize. Flourescent tagging and computer analysis can identify the unknown sequence from the multiple hits, since the synthetic sequences are known and the strength of flourescence. The GeneChip will run into trouble if the target DNA contains repeated sequences. GeneChip is used for hereditary defects and forensic analysis.
2. Molecular Evolution, Chapter 24: If we look at the DNA sequence of very closely related organisms, differences are found mainly here: (a) in the third codon position (because of redundancy in coding, AA encoded is likely the same); and (b) non-coding sequences. A good example of gene duplication: globin family of genes lead to two different proteins (**hemoglobin and myoglobin**), dependent on the applicable tissue. Evolutionarily, they diverged as they specialized to operate in different tissues. The hemoglobin gene split to give modern alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and epsilon globins, which are used during different phases of development. Ribosomes have their ribosomal RNA coded for by genes in the cell nucleus. Not so for other organelles (**Mitochondria** and Chloroplasts). Mito contain their own ribosomes and DNA. These ribosomes resemble those of bacteria (not their Eukaryotic cell nucleus). They are about the same size and shape, and have circular DNA. When a Eukaryotic cell divides, each daughter cell inherits some of its parents' mito. Mito are enslaved bacteria which were trapped long ago by modern Eukaryotic cells. The Mitos received shelter and nutrients, and generate energy by respiration. Over the years, they became specialized in energy production, and lost the ability to self survive. Most of the bacterial DNA has been lost in Mito (so it is much smaller Vs bacterial DNA). Each mitochondrion is estimated to contain 2–10 mtDNA copies. mtDNA is highly conserved, and it has slow mutation rates (relative to others, e.g., microsatellites); useful for phylogeny of organisms. Per Wiki, in heart muscle cells about 40% of the cytoplasmic space is taken up by mitochondria. In liver cells the figure is about 20-25% with 1000 to 2000 mitochondria per cell.
       Mutation rates for Mito are higher than for nuclear genes, especially in the 3rd codon position and in the **D-loop segment**. A child inherits mito DNA from his/her mother. There are 100 to 10,000 copies of Mito DNA. Mito DNA can even be obtained from museum samples and extinct animals. In humans, the 16,569 base pairs of mitochondrial DNA encode for only 37 genes (13 for energy protein coding, 22 for tRNA, and 2 for rRNA). It has two pairs of overlapping genes.  Humanin is also a protein coding gene, but has cytoprotective and neuroprotective effect, distinct from other protein coding genes. Each of the circular double strands has 15K to 17K bps. The 'Heavy Strand' (H-strand) is G-rich and carries 28 genes. The 'Light Strand' (L-strand) carries 9 strands.  mitochondria evolved a unique mechanism which maintains mtDNA integrity through degradation of excessively damaged genomes followed by replication of intact/repaired mtDNA.  mitochondrial DNA mutation can lead to  exercise intolerance and Kearns–Sayre syndrome (KSS), that leads to reduced function of heart, eye, and muscle movements. They might contribute to the aging process and age-related pathologies in a big way. **Species maximum life span = their mtDNA GC% * metabolic rate**. Mice genetically altered to accumulate mtDNA mutations at accelerated rate do age prematurely, but their tissues do not produce more ROS as predicted by the 'Vicious Cycle' hypothesis. Here is the Wiki [Reference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mitochondrial_DNA).  
3. Some relevant information on 'junk DNA': The **Selfish Gene** by Richard Dawkins, 1976 is a remarkable book that has reached both the layperson and the scientist. See Ridley's discussion [here](https://www.nature.com/articles/529462a). He postulated that  the digital information in a gene is effectively immortal and must be the primary unit of selection.  No other unit shows such persistence — not chromosomes, not individuals, not groups and not species. He also commented that "The true 'purpose' of DNA is to survive, no more and no less. The simplest way to explain the surplus DNA is to suppose that it is a parasite.”  The surpluse DNA is also referred to as 'junk DNA.' His remark eventually led to the discovery of 'transposons'- much surplus DNA consists of reverse transcriptase — a viral enzyme whose job is to spread copies of itself — or simplified versions of transposons dependent on it. Per Wiki, A transposable element (TE or transposon) is a DNA sequence that can change its position within a genome.  Transposition often results in duplication of the same genetic material. Barbara McClintock's discovery of these **jumping genes** earned her a Nobel Prize in 1983. In her 1953 work, McClintock found that genes could not only move, but they could also be turned on or off due to certain environmental 
conditions or during different stages of cell development. Per Wiki, Class I TEs (retrotransposons) are copied in two stages: first, they are transcribed from DNA to RNA, and the RNA produced is then reverse transcribed to DNA. This copied DNA is then inserted back into the genome at a new position. The reverse transcription step is catalyzed by a reverse transcriptase, which is often encoded by the TE itself. Three types: **long terminal repeats (LTRs), Long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs), and Short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs)**. Per Wiki, the most common transposable element in humans is the Alu sequence. It is approximately 300 bases long and can be found 0.5M times in the human genome. Alu alone is estimated to make up 15–17% of the human genome. TEs are mutagens: A functional gene after a transposone insertion will likely be disabled; similarly after a transposon leaves a functional gene; and multiple copies, for e.g., Alu sequence, can impact precise chromosomal pairing during mitosis and meiosis, resulting in chromosome duplication. Diseases from TEs: hemophilia, immunodeficiency, porphyria, predisposition to cancer, and muscular dystrophy. LINE1 (L1) TEs that land on the human Factor VIII cause haemophilia and insertion of L1 into the APC gene causes colon cancer, confirming that TEs play an importantrole in disease development. Here is the Wiki [reference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transposable_element). 
4. Understanding a seminar in molecular biology: Chapter 28 - 
