Notes from "Linux In Action" By D. Clinton, Manning, 2018

Bash is the most popular UNIX shell. A shell interprets user commands, either through a CLI (command line interface) or GUI (graphcial user interface). It is a software layer meant to execute formatted commands using the underlying kernel and HW system resources. *It is the way you talk to your computer*. 

In addition to the older 'more' command, there is a 'less' command now:

>less /etc/services #scroll up and down through the file with the arrow (I think Home and End keys on my keyboard), PgUp/PgDn, and spacebar keys. Press q to quit

Quickly create an empty file with 
>touch myfile #use nano or vi to open the file and enter text. Press Esc, type:w to save, and :q to exit. 
I use gedit for that purpose - gives a GUI to enter text. 

Every object within a Linux file system is represented by *inode* metadata. use
>stat myfile # view inode info (pp. 32 of the book). An *inode* is used by UNIX to id the disk location and attributes of files within a file system. There will be exactly one inode for each file or directory (typically). 

globbing (from 'global') is used to apply wild characters to the filenames addressed by the commands. 
>mkdir mytemp

>mv myf* mytemp # * is 0 to many characters; ? is for only one character.

>rm -r mytemp

Cutting and pasting - Ctrl-c and Ctrl-v do not work - need to use Shift-Ctrl-c and Shift-Ctrl-v. I checked and found that Copy and Paste with the mouse work fine.

*An aside*:
Here is a [link](https://opensource.com/article/17/7/20-sysadmin-commands) to explore 20 key Linux sysadmin commands: curl, Python json parsing tool, ls, tail, cat, grep, ps (process status), env (to set environment variables), top, netstat, ipaddress, Isof, df, etc. Curl is specific to PHP - JS has its own. Check [this](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/25515936/perform-curl-request-in-javascript). 

Use Tab to autocomplete. 

Contents of a Linux pseudo (or virtual) file, like those with /sys and /proc directories, don't really exist in the normal sense.  A pseudo file's contents are dynamically generated by the OS. 

>cat /sys/block/sda/size # for my linux system it is 500118192. #sda  is storage drive A, the first drive used by the OS on boot. On my Ubuntu, it can be accessed by going to the Files Icon, and clicking on 'shankardell' which is the link to the file system.. sys is one of the virtual folders identified there. sda is listed under block subfolder. Check out the sda folder - you will find names like sda1, sda2, and sda4. They represent partitions created by Linux to better organize the data on your drive.

*In his book, he uses $ to imply non-admin commands, and # for sudo commands*.

Linux documentation is available through the man command. If the command name is not known, use info in bash. It gives an interactive environment to explore. The content is arranged alphabetically. Scroll and enter to find. For eg., go to Basics and scroll down to File Permissions and Enter. First, note that this GUI within the shell windown (a bit cumbersome) has some useful commands: q for quit, ? for listing of all Info commands, h to start a tutorial, mTextInfo RET takes one to the Texinfo manual. Hitting on any * item in the hirerarchy takes one to the lower level. Reverse logic of using 'Ctrl *' takes one up the hierarchy (sometimes!) - it also can open the actual leaf level file. *c or *s cancels/stops. *x has no effect. 





