I recently upgraded from Ubuntu Version 17 to Version 18 (specific #s below). There were a few hiccups, but it is working now.

It started as a routine message that Version 18 is now available. Would you like to update? It started downloading and installing. Suddenly after a few hours, it went blank. That instant also coincided with low battery indication; so, I thought I would be able to continue if I could charge the battery, by connecting to an AC outlet. Earlier I had noticed a message that GRUB could not updated as there was an unsigned earlier linux version 4.4.0-131-generic. 

After a few false starts, I started this [process](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/RecoveryMode) for booting into recovery mode. In my case, disappearance of the Dell logo coincides with the completion of UEFI/BIOS loading. Hit Esc just around then (the author suggests press and hold the Shift key - does not work in my case). GRUB menu is displayed. Scroll down and choose the 'Advanced options.' Select the line ending with "recovery mode." It was the second line with this: Ubuntu GNU/Linux, with Linux 4.4.0-454-generic (recovery mode). Right under that, I could see the 4.4.0-131-generic that needed to be removed (for some reason, it was not visible earlier - became available after a few attempts - imaginge trying to remove the 131 version, while running under that kernel - that would have crashed the system!). Press return and the machine will begin the boot process. A menu will be displayed soon. Scroll down to "Drop the root to shell prompt." Press return with this option highlighted. This gives a shell prompt at the root. The root partition is mounted read-only. To make it read/wrie, enter this (this is different from the author's - which did not work), as per this [link](https://askubuntu.com/questions/91188/authentication-token-manipulation-error): mount -rw -o remount / -- note that all spaces are important. I think the recovery mode step 9: mount --all worked (though not sure now). 

Somewhere along the way, I received a message on kernel panic not syncing vfs. Here is the [solution](https://askubuntu.com/questions/41930/kernel-panic-not-syncing-vfs-unable-to-mount-root-fs-on-unknown-block0-0). As per this, I went back through the earlier steps (of turning off the system and booting in the recovery mode). Then do this: 2.	run dpkg --configure -a . This was supposed to complete the upgrade, including configuring the boot settings. It ended up the original message about an unsigned Linux kernel version. GRUB cannot be upgraded until this kernel was removed. I hit <OK> assuming there will be help to remove this kernel. Not so! It gave me more GRUB related error messages. So, I turned off power and rebooted again. This time I followed the steps [here](https://askubuntu.com/questions/176322/removing-old-kernel-entries-in-grub). Type uname -r - this will show you the kernel you're using currently. **You do not want to remove this**. I was using precisely the one I had to remove!. So, I had to reboot again and choose carefully a later (or earlier) kernel version that was not this unsigned Linux version. Fortunately, I noticed a later version that was signed and I started recovery with that kernel version. It was: *list the kernel version used in rebooting here*. Then as per this link on removing an old kernel, I listed all the kernels installed with: dpkg --list | grep linux-image . Then run this to remove the unsigned kernel: sudo apt-get purge linux-image-4.4.0-131 (note: no extensions such as generic etc). Then update the GRUB with sudo update-grub2. There was an error message: TSC_DEADLINE disabled due to Errata. I went to this [link](https://askubuntu.com/questions/984970/firmware-bug-tsc-deadline-disabled-due-to-errata-what-should-i-do-about-thi) about updating intel microcode. Used this: sudo apt-get install intel-microcode. But I had earlier noticed that something about amd updates and wondered whether my PC was AMD-based, not Intel-based. I rebooted and in the first display screen, I chose the Systems option where I found the information on the system, which turned out to be Intel based. However, as per our IT folks, both are equivalent. So, it was not an issue.  I also used this [link](https://askubuntu.com/questions/545925/how-to-update-intel-microcode-properly) to address this issue (not clear now why or how!). The result: It said my iucode was already the latest. Asked me to remove old installs with sudo autoremove. I did that. Rebooted. 
  
  Now, it went through the steps and 'hung' in the shell window with a message like this: user gdm session started with an OK to its left. This was confusing since I did not know at that time that 'gdm' stood for gnome display manager and my GUI window should have started. So, after waiting for 15 minutes, I finally realized that it was not doing anything. Then I explored my options. Apparently now we have gdm2 and lightdm. Online discussion implied that gdm2 may not work, though the better choice. Either way, I used this [link](https://askubuntu.com/questions/139491/how-to-change-from-gdm-to-lightdm) to run these steps: sudo apt-get install lightdm and sudo dpkg-reconfigure lightdm . In the ensuing screens, choose OK and scroll down and choose lightdm (the other option will be gdm2) and hit enter. Now, it is all setup (one hopes!). Reboot and I got the GUI working! So, all is well at present. 
